Hello Space Fans and welcome to another edition
of Space Fan News.
This week, ALMA is at it again.
Astronomers using the world's largest radio
telescope the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter
array (that's what ALMA stands for) have found
the most massive star in the Milky Way Galaxy.
ALMA is composed of 66 high precision antennas
located on the (oh man, I have no idea how
to pronounce this) Chajnantor plateau, which
is 5000 meters high in northern Chile.
So while sitting high atop the Chajnantor
plateau looking all high and mighty, astronomers
pointed ALMA towards the constellation Norma
(The Carpenter's Square), yes that's a constellation,
and looked at the dark star forming cloud
known as Spitzer Dark Cloud 335.579-0.292.
There, looking in the microwave region of
the spectrum they found the most massive star
in our galaxy 11,000 light years away.
SDC335.579-0.292 was first discovered as an
environment of dark, dense filaments of gas
from observations using the Spitzer Space
Telescope and ESA's Herschel Space Observatory.
Now ALMA has looked at it with it's high sensitivity
in detail at both the amount of dust and the
motion of the gas moving around within the
dark cloud — and there they found a really
massive star being born.
The goal here was to observe how really massive
stars form and these observations hit pay
dirt: they found the largest protostellar
core ever seen in the Milky Way.
This core has over 500 times the mass of our
Sun swirling around inside.
And the ALMA observations show that much more
material is still flowing inwards and increasing
the mass still further.
This star formation region is forming many
stars and the 500 solar mass core is the most
massive of several.
This material will eventually collapse to
form a young star up to 100 times as massive
as our home star.
Only about one in ten thousand of all the
stars in the Milky Way reach that kind of
mass.
Not only are these stars rare, but their birth
is extremely rapid and their childhood is
short, so finding such a massive object so
early in its evolution is really hard, making
this a spectacular.
Different theories exist as to how massive
stars form but the team's findings lend weight
to the idea that the entire cloud core begins
to collapse inwards, with material raining
in towards the center to form one or more
massive stars.
Sounds good to me.
Next, astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope
have figured out the actual visible-light
color of a planet orbiting another star 63
light-years away.
If we could see this planet directly, it would
look just like that famous 'pale blue dot'
picture of Earth taken from the Voyager 1
spacecraft back in 1990.
Unfortunately we can't do that yet so what
they did instead was point Hubble's Imaging
Spectrograph at it to measure changes in the
color of light from the system before, during,
and after the passage of the planet behind
the parent star.
We got lucky here, this technique is possible
because the planet's orbit happened to be
tilted edge-on as viewed from Earth; and because
of that, it routinely passes in front of and
then behind the star.
Here's how they did it.
It's quite clever actually.
In order to measure what this planet would
look like, the astronomers measured how much
light was reflected off the surface of the
exoplanet known as HD 189733b — a property
known as albedo.
Now this planet is faint and close to its
star.
To isolate the planet's light from this starlight,
Hubble measured a small drop in light — about
one part in 10,000 — of the star's light
when the planet went behind it, along with
a very tiny change in the color of the light,
too.
As it moved behind the star the light become
less bright in the blue, but not in the green
or the red.
This meant that the planet that went behind
the star must be blue because light from was
missing in the blue, but not in the red when
it was hidden.
The planet was contributing a tiny amount
of blue light to the star's spectrum as it
passed in front.
So, it must be blue.
See?
Clever huh?
Now the Earth looks blue from space because
the oceans absorb red and green wavelengths
more strongly than blue light.
In addition, the oceans reflect Earth's blue
sky where the shorter blue wavelengths of
sunlight are selectively scattered by atmospheric
oxygen and nitrogen molecules in a process
called Rayleigh scattering.
But that's not why this planet is blue, far
from it.
HD 189733b was discovered in 2005.
It is only 2.9 million miles from its parent
star, the planet is so close that it is gravitationally
"tidally locked" so that one side always faces
the star and the other side is always dark.
In 2007 the Spitzer Space Telescope measured
the infrared light, or heat, from the planet.
This observation produced one of the first-ever
temperature maps of an exoplanet.
The map shows that the dayside and night-side
temperatures differ by about 260 degrees Celsius.
This temperature difference would cause fierce
winds to roar from the daytime to nighttime
side of the planet.
So why is this planet blue?
According to the spectra there are silicate
particles laced in the high clouds of the
atmosphere.
Because the temperature is so high the silicate
particles could condense and form very small
drops and they would scatter blue light more
than red light.
So let's put all this together, here we have
a planet with a daytime temperature of over
1,000 degrees Celsius, and it possibly rains
glass — sideways mind you — in howling
7,000 kilometer per hour winds.
Just like downtown.
Well, that's it for this week Space Fans.
Thank you for watching and as always, Keep
Looking Up!